Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, one of the
weirdnesses of our current market moment
>> Yeah. is that you have all these oil
analysts who keep talking about how the
Strait of Hormuz closure is like the
theoretical exercise that the entire
market used to have nightmares about.
This was like the big risk in the entire
oil market. And yet, and yet, if you
look at the actual price of oil and
where it's trading,
>> Yeah. I mean, it's gone up.
>> up a lot.
>> But it's not It doesn't strike me as
panic levels. Yeah, I mean, it's gone up
a lot. And you know, it started the year
I'm just looking at Brent. Uh it started
the year around 60. It had climbed
around 70 before the uh war started. Now
at 115. So it's a huge move in some
sense.
But it's not even at 2022 levels, which
were very high. And that all that's
true. And yet, there's this disconnect
that I don't understand. Like, why isn't
it at 200 yet? And whatever. Cuz Strait
of Hormuz is closed, etc. Why isn't it
even higher? But then the other thing
is, okay, like prices are up a lot.
But then you look at like what
governments around the world are doing
and it's like hair on fire panic,
particularly in East Asia. So you get
stories about, you know, Korean
government workers being told to drive
on drive to work depending uh whether
their license plate number ends in even
and odd. Like extreme
>> A very 1970s Yeah. And so I'm trying to
like it still feels like there are some
puzzle pieces here that I'm trying to
fit together. Absolutely. The other
thing I would say is it feels also like
there's this disconnect between what's
going on in the financial world and
what's going on in the physical world.
Yeah, and there was this really
interesting note. This wasn't purely
related to oil, but you could kind of
extrapolate from it. But it was from
Bloomberg Green Markets the other day
and they were talking about urea coming
out of the Middle East and the pricing
that they've been seeing from it. And
one of the analysts says, "The real
issue on pricing is that while sellers
and buyers can quote almost any price,
nothing is actually getting out of the
Gulf. That reality makes most discussion
academic rather than representative of
actual business." So, I wonder how much
of that is happening in the oil market
as well, where you have all these quotes
that are flashing across the screen, but
like for barrels that are essentially
not going anywhere for a while.
>> Yeah, and I still don't totally get it
because, right, like these things do
have to settle at some point and I don't
know, I'm confused. And then there were
those headlines early on about how
physical oil quoted in Oman were $50 a
barrel above the front month. Many
things I don't understand. So, we have
to talk to someone who can answer all
these questions for us.
>> The great thing about an oil crisis,
Joe, is that we will learn about all the
oil benchmarks throughout the entire
world. Okay, well, we really do have the
perfect guest. Someone who's been on the
show before, who a lot of people have
requested us to bring back to talk about
this particular moment in time. So,
without further ado, we have, of course,
Javier Blas. He is the energy and
commodities columnist over at Bloomberg.
Been writing about this stuff for a very
long time. Javier, thank you so much for
coming back on Odd Lots.
>> Uh my pleasure. Seems that every time
that um I'm back is because of a crisis.
Yep. That's right. Okay, well, let's
just jump into it. How bad is this one?
It's bad and it could get really bad.
But in any energy crisis, there are two
elements that they are very important.
One is the size of the disruption and
the size is huge. And then is the length
of that disruption, how long it goes.
And so far
the disruption is relatively short
lived. We have been a month. So, that's
one of the reasons why we are not at
crazy high oil prices yet. It's just
because it's a bit too early. Uh give it
a few more weeks and certainly we will
get there. But so far the crisis is
relatively short-lived. How How
short-lived? Well, look at 2022 with
Russia. We are still at it 4 years
later.
>> Mhm. Or look at how long it took for the
resolution of
the invasion of Kuwait in 1990. That was
about 8 months. So,
at times we forget how long other crises
were and and they were a lot longer than
this one. Okay, so now connect that to
what we're seeing with governments
around the world like already going into
rationing mode. Almost everywhere you
look, particularly you see it a lot in
Africa already, a lot in East Asia. If
the story is, okay, the price hikes
haven't exploded to crazy high levels
because this is still short-lived, maybe
there's some buffer stocks, why this
rationing reality? Well, you are
absolutely right that what is really
cushioning the market right now is a
number of buffers that we are going
through. One is regular inventories that
every country, every refinery has to
normal functioning. Then is also the
strategic inventories that some
countries own, particularly
industrialized countries like the United
States, Europe, Japan, and also China.
Those have been mobilized
in in most in most places have been
released. And also we entered the crisis
with a market that was oversupply. There
was even floating storage. That is when
an oil tanker has been loaded, it's on
the high seas, but it cannot find a
buyer and it basically sits on the high
seas looking for someone who will take
the oil. And we have quite a lot of that
just going into the crisis. So there was
quite an element of buffer through the
system and probably a larger buffer than
in in normal circumstances because the
market was oversupplied. That is helping
to cushion or to mitigate the crisis.
Where we are seeing some actions by
government is where countries are closer
to the crisis which is the Strait of
Hormuz. So the closer the you are to
that location, the more action you need
to take because you typically depend
more of that flow of oil coming from the
Middle East and also because you are
impacted earlier.
If you are moving
oil from say Saudi Arabia into India,
that's only a few days at most a week of
sailing time. If you are moving that to
say the Philippines, that's about 15
days. It's longer if you are moving that
oil into Europe, probably around 3
weeks. And it's even longer if you are
moving that oil into say the United
States where Saudi oil takes about 40
days. So all of that means that the
crisis is felt in some places quicker
than in other places. Also,
it's how the global oil market works.
And to put it in in quite simple terms,
and I'm afraid that I have to go with
colonial vocabulary, but the oil market
is divided in two large chunks.
East of Suez and West of Suez. This is
like, you know, the British Empire was
still around and everything was East or
West of of the Suez Canal.
Countries that they are East of Suez,
mostly Asia, rely a lot in on Middle
East oil these days and therefore they
are impacted earlier on the crisis. West
of Suez, Europe, Western Europe and
the whole American continent is a bit
detached from that market and therefore
the crisis will hit them much later.
So I know a bunch of um EMH bros are
going to get mad at me for even asking
this, but like could you get a situation
where you can't get oil at any price in
certain countries?
Uh
I mean in in in a absolutely full-blown
crisis where we have the Strait of
Hormuz closed for many months, we may
have a long war in Iran. Yes, I think
that we can get into a situation that no
matter what you are offering for a
barrel of oil, no one is willing to sell
cuz there will be a wall of um export
bans where every country is trying to
keep their oil for themselves, etc. And
I think that yes, I can see a scenario
in which no matter how much
you are paying for a barrel of oil, you
may not find a buyer or you know may
find enough barrels for whatever you are
offering. But that will be in a really
extreme extreme situation. I have a very
rudimentary oil 101 class. Actually, I
found a free book on my sidewalk called
oil 101 yesterday and I picked it up. I
should have read it.
>> Why would anyone throw that out right
now?
>> It seems crazy to me. No, it's it's
really it's a it's like a full-on book.
Do you know this book, Morgan Downey?
It's a very thick book, oil 101. Someone
just put it on my sidewalk. Anyway, I
have an oil 101 Wait, are you sure
someone's not like laying a trap for you
or something? They're trying to lure you
out of your house? Well, I'm going to
ask you an oil 101 question cuz it When
we see, okay,
Brent crude 115.25 is it at the time.
How is the Brent benchmark formed?
Oh gosh. Okay, sorry.
No, it it is
it is a simple question and a
complicated one. Effectively, we are
talking about a bunch of crude oil from
the North Sea. Okay.
>> Uh so mostly UK and Norway, but also
crude oil from Texas that comes across
the Atlantic and through effectively
buyers and sellers on the physical
market, we get a price that then cascade
into the financial market. But here is a
very important
>> I guess the reason I'm asking is because
I associate Brent with the North Sea,
and that's west of the Suez. And so when
we're talking about east of the Suez
oil, why is this the price and how
connected is that price to the oil
moving that actually affects these
markets? I guess that's sort of why the
question was on my mind. No, that that's
a a crucial question. There are about
different grades of crude oil that we
track on a given time. And Brent is used
effectively a short hand for the average
barrel in the world. And it's not really
the average barrel, and certainly not
the average barrel that comes from the
Middle East. So you will have to look at
benchmarks like Oman, Dubai, that they
are closer to the quality of the Middle
East oil. And those benchmarks are a bit
higher than what Brent is trading today.
But if I may suggest, forget about the
price of a barrel of oil. Okay. No one
cares about the price of oil unless you
are someone producing oil in Texas or
Saudi Arabia, or you are someone who
owns a refinery. Those are the people
that care about the price of a barrel of
crude.
The rest of us, you and I,
we care about the price of a refined
product, because that's what we consume.
We consume gasoline, we consume diesel,
or we consume other refined products
that they are embedded into a service
that we are buying. Think about an
airfare ticket, where inside that ticket
there is a a big proportion of that that
is jet fuel. Or you are buying, I don't
know, a cup made of plastic. Well, that
is you you you are buying effectively
some kind of transformed naphtha. And
obviously, you know, the transformation
and the retail margin and so on. But
what matters really is the price of
refined products. And there, actually,
we are beginning to see, particularly in
the east
in the southeast Asian market, some very
extreme prices. So, well, if you look at
the price of crude or
Brent or WTI or Oman, things look
relatively contained. You know, we are
trading around 100 110 dollars a barrel.
That is well below the all-time high.
You look at the cost of diesel in
Singapore, which is a benchmark for the
southeast Asian market. The price there
is approaching 200 dollars a barrel,
which is something that we have never
seen. So, the refined product is where
really we are seeing the real tension.
This is exactly what I want to ask you.
So, if you look at the benchmark prices
for for crude oil, we've seen higher
prices before, right? And relatively
recently, in 2022. But, if you look at
the refined products, we're getting to
places again that we that we haven't
seen. What explains that disconnect?
Like, back in 2022, why didn't we see
the higher cost of crude feed into
refined products the way that we seem to
be seeing now? For two reasons. One is
because we have lost not only a lot of
crude oil production, but we have lost a
significant chunk of refined production.
The Middle East also has a lot of
refineries which are export refineries.
They they are just devoted to to the
export market. And the global trade of
refined products is a lot smaller than
the global trade of crude oil. So, even
a small reduction of supply could have a
much larger impact. You think about the
market for the global market for crude
oil, which is 100 million barrels,
around 60 million are traded globally.
But, if you look at the market for say
jet fuel, that market is a lot of
smaller and we have lost a significant
proportion of the refineries who are
serving that international market for
jet fuel and therefore prices are
reacting much more stronger than we saw
in previous crisis. There's also the way
that the world of refining works. Some
refineries are slowing down intake of
crude oil because there is not enough in
the market. But we have not really seen
yet the consumers reacting the same way.
So what is happening is the refining
world is acting as a buffer in between
crude oil that is not there and
consumers that have not yet realized
that the crude oil is not there. So the
refined market is trying to basically
get that two together and the way that
it can only do it is by extreme pricing
and indicated consumers, "Hey, I don't
have enough crude to make these refined
products. So please, can you stop
demanding the refined products?" And the
please is basically $200 a barrel
diesel. Mhm. Um, I should just say we're
recording this on March 31st and a
headline just hit related to this. Uh,
Trump tells allies to buy US jet fuel or
take it from Hormuz. So
>> I have no idea if we have spare jet
fuel. I do not know Speaking of refined
products though in East Asia, one of the
charts that's probably gone the most
viral is that Singapore jet fuel chart.
And that more than any other chart
probably shows that gap that Javier is
talking about between the underlying
quoted price of barrels, which is high,
but that jet fuel price is way above now
the 2022 high. So that speaks to it.
Javier, you were just down in Houston.
Are any Americans from your perspective,
are we going to pick up the slack? Do
you see American oil entrepreneurs doing
more drilling and exploration to take
advantage of these high prices? I mean,
for sure at the $100 oil, everyone is
going to try to do more just make
basically because it makes a lot of
money. I mean,
a US shale producer in Texas was looking
to sell his oil about 6 weeks ago for
$60 a barrel and he can sell the oil at
100 today. So, everyone who can increase
production a bit is going to try, but do
I see massive amount of extra drilling
coming in the US over the next 3 months
which is what really we needed? No,
that's not going to happen over the next
3 months. And also, we are losing so
much oil that, you know, it it doesn't
matter what the US shale producers do. I
mean, it will have on the margins, but
the gap is big and you know, I have been
discussing with some of the colleagues
on the newsroom and with analysts and
traders how big is the gap? Is it a
million? Is it 9 million? Is it 10? Is
it 12? I mean, at the end of the day,
it almost doesn't matter because we are
talking about that about 10% of the
global oil supply. I mean, whether it is
8% or 11%
it really doesn't really matter. We are
losing so much oil that either the
conflict ends soon or prices need to
move much, much higher. I mean, I am
surprised that we are not much higher
and in some ways, it really speaks of
how good the White House has been at
jawboning the market, make verbal
intervention, make threats, make
promises, a lot of them false, but it
has worked in preventing a lot of the
panic buying that we have seen in
previous crisis.
What's going on with US natural gas?
Because if you look there, I mean, we're
talking about like
muted market moves in the oil market,
even though those have risen. If you
look at nat gas, nat gas has actually
come down.
Yeah, nat gas in the United States is
trading almost as a 6-month low, which
considering what is happening on the
global um energy market, it almost
incredible. I mean, the reason that is
US shale, and the reason is that you
cannot export gas easily. For exporting
gas, you first need to cool it down,
liquefy. Uh that basically means having
an enormous fridge uh that cools gas
from, you know, room temperature to
minus 160
Celsius. Then it liquefies, and then you
can put it on a tanker and send it to
the rest of the market. Cuz we have
limited liquefaction capacity, even it
does increase in quite quickly, that
creates a bottleneck that means that the
US and Canadian gas effectively is
trapped inside North America, and that's
keeping prices completely detached from
the global market. And that is a huge
difference from previous episodes of
high energy prices. Even in 2022, the
price of US natural gas went from around
$3.50 $4 to almost 10 uh dollars per
British thermal unit. This time it's
staying at around three, actually below
$3 an MBTU. And that is incredible
because it means that the heavy US
industry, electricity generators,
chemical companies, fertilizer
companies,
it's like
there is no crisis. While everyone else
in the world is suffering, the US is
completely insulated. There is something
odd and perverse about some of the
disparate impacts here in terms of who
is behind and who has catalyzed this war
and which side of the Suez you're on
there and who is feeling the brunt of
it. But that actually, you know, you
mentioned fertilizer. We've talked about
fertilizer on the podcast.
These are the type of things, you know,
food insecurity that
create serious political instability
potentially around the world. How
worried are you? You We We all know you
as the oil and the oil guy, but you've
written a lot about food over the years.
I remember you wrote a great piece about
in 2022 about how rice is going to come
to the rescue and people couldn't get as
much wheat. So, I know you know the food
world, too. How concerned are you about
food and uh yeah, the the sort of
fallout from from that? Today, I'm not
very concerned. Okay.
>> This could all change if the war just
goes on for months. Um if if President
Trump decides that he wants to invade
Iran with ground troops, etc., etc. But
now, I'm not very concerned for for a
number of reasons. 2022 was a huge shock
to the global food market because it
affected a breadbasket region of the
world.
You look at Russia and Ukraine at the
time combined, they accounted for around
a quarter of global exports of wheat and
barley, around 15% of global exports of
corn, and even much higher percentage
for some vegetable oil like rapeseed and
some flour. The Russian invasion of
Ukraine, the battleground was some of
the most some of the richest fertile
farmland in the planet. The battleground
of the crisis in the Middle East is
deserts and a piece of sea that we call
the Strait of Hormuz.
It doesn't have the same impact in terms
of global supply.
It does have an impact on fertilizer
prices, so it did also the 2022 war
between Russia and Ukraine, which is
still ongoing. But fertilizer prices
require time to have an impact on food
production. And also, while yes, the
numbers are very scary and you look at
the global fertilizer market just
focusing on urea, you you look at that
market and say, "Oh boy, it's going up a
lot. We are approaching the 2022 record
high." But that is a problem in many
markets. It is a problem that is not a
food problem. It will be a fiscal
problem. And the reason is that urea
fertilizer in particular is massively
subsidized in the developing world,
particularly in places like India and
Pakistan. So, the problem there is going
to be for the Indian government, can it
afford and spend billions of dollars
extra subsidizing fertilizer? Less so,
is it going to be a food crisis in
India? Because the the the fertilizer, I
think, is going to be there. It's used
that you are the finance minister in
India, you you have a big problem there.
That's That's how I'm seeing the
problem. And also, the global food
market
is
in a better position that almost any
time in the last two or three decades.
Inventories of wheat are very high.
Inventories of rice in particular are an
all-time high. And while you mentioned
rice, while we are worried about
fertilizer prices, etc., etc., if you
look at the most important benchmark for
rice prices in Asia, it's about to hit
at 19-year low.
Good. Well, not if you're a farmer in
the Well, if you're the vast majority of
people who need to eat, who most people
aren't farmers, right? Sure, but But but
look, as I said, this this all depends
on how long it stays because
you know, if you have fertilizer prices
for for several months high, diesel
prices very high,
uh then you start eroding the
flexibility on the on the system, and
you don't want to go the weather can be
very funny, and if you just we get bad
weather when we just really need good
weather. So, my main concern right now
will be what I'm going to be looking at.
If this last a couple of more months,
then my main focus is going to be how
good is the monsoon? Are we going to
have a good monsoon season in India or
is it going to be a bad one? Because if
we have a bad one, then we have a
problem. Yeah. I've been reading about
the
fertilizer urea tenders that the Indian
government does periodically. It's just
really interesting like, you know, this
big exercise to purchase subsidized
urea. And so far, from what I
understand, they've been putting it off
because of the uncertainty in prices.
So, who knows what's going to happen.
But, okay,
Ukraine and Russia have come up a couple
times in this conversation.
What's going on with Russian oil right
now?
Uh listeners can't see, but Javier is is
smiling. Tell us, Javier. Well, it's
almost like, oh boy, if we we didn't
have enough with the Middle East, here
is Ukraine. And you could not blame
Ukraine is fighting for survival. So,
they are hitting Russia as hard as they
can, wherever they can. And that means
hitting their oil terminals. In the
past, they were hitting the terminals in
the south of the country, that's the
Black Sea, but they have found a
corridor to send drones, long-distance
drones, into the north, into the Baltic.
And I think that the Russians were
caught completely off guard. They they
didn't think that that Ukraine will be
able to hit the terminals in the far
north of of Russian territory. So, they
were not very well protected or just the
Ukrainians were extremely good at it.
But, the terminals have been damaged
significantly. We we don't know for sure
the extent of the damage, but looking at
the satellite pictures, it looks bad
enough. So, we may be also losing
potentially 1 million barrels a day of
Russian oil.
And it's not really the time. Again, you
cannot blame Ukraine, but it's not
really the time when you want to be
losing more oil.
Yeah, it's pretty wild, right? So, on in
some sense, there have been the stories
about, okay, Russia benefiting because
of relaxed sanctions and surging prices,
but on the other hand, just from the
global perspective, here is more supply
that's being taken off the market. So, I
mentioned or it's been Tracy mentioned
we're recording this March 31st in the
morning. Last night we got the Wall
Street Journal headline that maybe Trump
will be comfortable ending this war even
if the Strait of Hormuz is not back to
normal. And Iran passed a law that
codified that the
the Strait of Hormuz won't go back to
normal and it's going to collect a toll,
it says, and so forth. Let's say, okay,
the war ends. Let's say Trump decides to
unilaterally end the war without
resolution here and like, how big of a
fundamental change is this to the Middle
East? If it's sort of accepted that Iran
has a Strait of Hormuz toll booth, could
this be a tolerable situation for the
region? Like, what is that what is the
significance of that? I would be
surprised if the region was to be happy
with Iran having a toll booth on the
strait. I don't think that any country
should be happy that an international
strait just becomes, you know, a toll
booth for for passing ships. I mean,
like, what if it stops Morocco or
Gibraltar or Spain to impose a similar
situation in the Mediterranean or
Denmark in in the Danish straits in in
in
in the Baltic. I mean, you or Singapore
on the Singaporean strait. You create a
a very, very bad precedent for
international peace and and and free
shipping. I would be surprised if
countries in the in the Middle East were
happy to it. Would they need it to
accept it?
I mean, at current prices of $100, say
that you you know, you are an export
country and you have to pay half a
dollar per barrel as a fee. I think that
that's something that everyone will say,
well, you know, I mean, we are still
selling the oil at $100, so instead of
100, we are selling at 99 and 1/2,
that's pretty good to me. So, I suppose
that some of the oil will will flow, but
but you let Iran basically to dictate
terms and dictate terms forever, and
that will mean also that that Iran has a
very tight grip on policy and economic
decisions that his neighbors have been
doing independently before. So, I cannot
see that on the long term. I don't see
also countries like China being
particularly happy with that
arrangement. But, if anything over the
last 5 years or so, we have seen things
on international diplomacy and
international security that I said
before, now that's not going to happen,
and then I have to eat my hat. I Sorry,
I just got a visual of Havier eating his
his hat. Okay. I would would would I
sprinkle some olive oil on top of the
hat and then I eat it. Of course. Olive
oil and tomatoes, yeah. Okay.
One thing that people have talked about
for I'm pretty sure the duration of all
of our careers are attempts to move away
from pricing oil in dollars. And if you
think about the current situation,
there's something very perverse about
seeing the dollar go up because there's
a scramble for barrels of oil because of
an action taken by the United States.
From your contacts in the oil market, is
anyone talking about like actual
currency pricing for barrels at the
moment? Is this something that is going
to get renewed traction? No, I I I don't
hear anyone. I mean, certainly Iran may
be happy to take other currencies.
Has been relatively happy to take
Chinese yuan and also the other
currencies which has problems on on
convertibility.
Everyone else will still want the
dollar. And the way that it was put to
me to a leading producing country in the
Middle East, and I was talking to to the
head of the central bank and going to
not name the country but they said to me
so if I switch from the dollar to say
the yuan I move from a relatively high
interest rate to a low interest rate I
move from full convertibility to a lot
of problems to convert and I move from
maximum liquidity to no liquidity
whatsoever and then the central bank
governor said like why I would like to
do that why I would like to really take
a step back on my currency and I think
that the yuan is not there yet for oil
producers and everyone that is using
other currencies that the dollar to
price their oil or to invoice their oil
they are doing it because they are under
American sanctions they are not doing it
because they want to do it they are
doing it because they have no other
option that to do it just because they
are on the naughty corner of the US
Treasury So I feel like the 2022-2023
inflation crisis commodities crisis
really delivered a near-death blow to a
lot of the decarbonization dreams of the
2010s and so forth and we saw you know
we know a bunch of companies and
countries sort of quietly ditched their
goals of net zero and all that it seems
like this is going to have a further
effect on this but especially because in
some Asian economies I imagine it sounds
like coal is going to be ramped back up
etc. But there's an interesting dynamic
and I forget who talked about it you
know we did this episode about how this
could even further accelerate the
Chinese EV exports etc. and efforts to
reduce oil consumption
Could we see the situation in which we
essentially have electrification without
decarbonization that basically we see
this boom for electrification maybe you
were the one who used this term someone
was talking about it might have just
been you but more electric cars and more
coal at the same time I think that we
can't I think that that's a very good
way to put it because I think that we
can have a simultaneous push to try to
get
to reduce your dependence on oil and to
reduce your dependence on Middle East
oil in particular is is going to be see
and unsafe, particularly if Iran somehow
still has some control whether it's a
toll booth or some kind of de facto
control over the over the Strait of
Hormuz. Who would like to be dependent
of of of, you know, Middle Eastern oil
in that situation? Cuz you think that
there's going to be a crisis 6 months
down the road. And and the solution for
that is going to be, you know, more
generation with coal. And we are seeing
that just, you know, across the whole of
Asia whether it's poor countries like
Pakistan or India or the most developed
countries in the region like Japan, all
of them are going for more coal right
now. But I think that we are going to
see also over the medium and and longer
time we're going to see a movement for
more solar alongside batteries. So I can
see the role of LNG uh liquefied natural
gas is squeezed out of the electricity
system with a push for more coal as the
immediate future and more, you know,
down the road with more solar and more
batteries. Effectively, you know, at
least for a few years means perhaps more
electrification but with more carbon
intensive production of that electricity
which is not exactly what the doctor
recommended.
Now, um Javier, one of the reasons we
wanted to talk to you other than a bunch
of our listeners have been clamoring for
us to have you on but you of course
wrote an excellent book called The World
for Sale: Money, Power, and the Traders
Who Bartered the Earth's Resources.
You're very plugged in to the commodity
scene. What's been the most surprising
reaction or thing that you've heard from
that space over the past month or so?
Uh
I mean, I think that there are a couple
of things that there are very
interesting. One is how little relative
the price of natural gas in Europe,
which was the epicenter of the 2022
crisis, has moved. Yes, sure, the price
of natural gas, we refer to the
benchmark as TTF, it's a Dutch benchmark
for Europe, has gone up a lot, about 70%
since the crisis started, but it's
around the same level as it was 14
months ago. And actually today, or the
last time I checked the price this
morning, was lower than 4 weeks ago. So,
it went up a lot at the beginning of the
war, and since then has kind of
flattened or or come down. And that is a
an indication of of how much LNG supply
is coming into the market. A lot of it
is coming from North America, the US and
Canada. And that that really is
something that a lot of traders,
physical traders, knew was coming, but I
think it still has surprised some hedge
funds. And alongside is the price of
electricity, because at times we we we
focus on on oil, and we see energy
crisis through the lens still of 1970,
1973, 1979, the first and second oil
crisis. But the global economy has
changed a lot since then, and yes, of
course, gasoline and diesel are very
important, but electricity is really
what powers today the global economy. If
you go to, you know, your bakery
downstairs or your coffee shop, that's
all electricity. And the price of
electricity increased a lot in 2022, but
particularly here in Europe, we saw
prices, we look at German prices as a
benchmark for the whole of Europe, and
they typically look at the one-year
forward, because they kind of smooth out
a lot of the, you know, month and
day-to-day volatility. The one-year
forward for electricity prices in
Germany went up to nearly a thousand
euros per megawatt hour. It's now around
90. So, when people talk about, are we
seeing an energy crisis like 2022? I
say, "Look, if you look at refined
products or even crude oil, yes, it's
bad. If you look at gas
in Europe, it's getting uncomfortable,
but it's not bad. In the US, they have
not even noticed that there is a crisis.
If you look at the electricity market,
it's like someone said the word crisis
because we are at normal prices here. I
mean, like I I have not seen anything
moving. And I think that that has been
quite
at the center of conversations. And it's
also one of the reasons when I talked to
central banks, which they are a bit
more at ease than they were in 2022
because in 2022,
the four major energy commodities,
electricity, natural gas, coal, and oil,
all of them went up simultaneously, and
they went to extreme prices.
So far on this crisis, we have seen a
movement in oil and a bit of natural gas
in Europe and Asia, not everywhere else.
Coal has barely moved. Electricity is
just basically relaxing and and having a
very Spanish siesta.
All right, Javier. Thank you so much for
coming back on Odd Lots. Really
appreciate it. My pleasure.
Joe, great to talk to Javier, as always.
Uh a couple things stood out to me from
that conversation. So,
it seems like everything is very
relative in commodities at the moment.
Like the relative price moves really
seem to matter and like be quite
different to each other. So,
the idea that maybe we shouldn't be
focusing on the crude price so much.
It's more the refined products where
we're really seeing the impact, which is
what matters for, you know, everyday
consumption and economic growth. And
then secondly, the idea that we You
don't have that much movement in natural
gas. Yeah. Which is kind of weird, but
also relevant if you're worried about
inflation because that would be I think
like the primary channel electricity
prices through which you would see
higher prices ripple through the
economy. Yeah.
>> I mean, look, also I mean gasoline
prices are going to go to $5 very
plausibly. Diesel prices in the US are
up. So, it's going to there's going to
be a strain, but I do think that is as
you say the really key thing. It is like
That That You know what really helped me
understand this was just this idea of
distance between the straight and where
you're an end consumer. Right. And you
have to figure too that like if the
distance is fairly narrow and short and
you're getting your oil from your next
door neighbor, you're going to have less
you know, less reason to hold a lot of
stocks and so forth. And so, when you
see these headlines
in East Asia, like they're already in
rationing mode, like I sort of get it.
Whereas in other parts, you know,
there's not a ton of imports west of
Suez from Saudi Arabia Saudi Arabia, but
there is some. So, in some of these
areas or some of these longer distances
like the Philippines etc., the the sort
of drop dead date or whatever, maybe
that's a little too extreme, but the
sort of the true moment the crisis hits
hasn't hit yet. Everything's relative,
Joe, especially geography. Well, the
other thing I was thinking though is you
know, these buffer stocks have helped
the market weather this crisis so far.
But, I just like I have to imagine that
if things were to get resolved in the
next I don't know week or two or even
month, that everyone around the world is
going to be scrambling to rebuild some
of their stockpiles of oil. So, I just
don't see like that immediate pressure
on price necessarily dissipating that
fast, but there still seem to be a lot
of people in the oil market who think it
is. So. It's a pretty weird time. And
you know, one of the things I think like
in the very early days of the war,
uh one thing that perhaps kept oil
prices somewhat contained was like, "Oh,
Trump is going to taco, right? He
doesn't There's not much appetite for
any pain." And then I think the next
step which we're in right now is and
this next leg up that we've seen, we
have seen um Brent futures trade close
yesterday at the highest prices yet in
this crisis. The next leg is probably
Well, Trump couldn't
chicken out even if you wanted to
because Iran gets to say. And then the
next stage maybe, well, maybe Trump
unilaterally decides to end the war.
Iran still controls the Strait of Hormuz
to some extent. How does the world live
with a toll booth, etc., which is not
great for anyone, not thrilled, but also
perhaps
I don't know, maybe like the market
could live with that for a while. So, we
seem to be maybe moving I don't know.
It'll be interesting to see if this
latest headline, how long that stays
with us and if that becomes the new meta
that or the new narrative that it'll
just be, yes, this is not great, but
this is not great is better than no
movement at all. It's very seven stages
of grief, isn't it?
>> it does feel it does feel like that,
yeah.
>> from denial to like depression and then
reconstruction.
>> Finally acceptance. Yeah. All right.
Shall we leave it there? Let's leave it
there. This has been another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
You can follow me @tracyalloway. And I'm
Joe Weisenthal. You can follow me
@thestalwart. Follow our guest Javier
Blas @javierblas. And of course, check
out all of his Bloomberg Opinion
columns. Follow our producers Carmen
Rodriguez @carmenarmon, Dash Bennett
@dashbot, and Caleb Brooks @calebbrooks.
And for more Odd Lots content, go to
bloomberg.com/oddlots
for the daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
it when we talk to Javier about global
oil markets, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely ad-free.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.